The just concluded ninth edition of the Uganda Film Festival saw several films win awards in the various categories. The Kenyan movie Bangarang won Best East African Film at the gala night held on June 3. Ugandan Maynard Mulindwa’s debut film Foot Wine won Best Director (Film of the Year) and Best Production Design awards, and Loukman Ali’s The Girl in The Yellow Jumper (currently streaming on Netflix) won Best Sound Design, Best Post Production/Editing and Best Cinematography. Also read: Dreams come true for Bongo film Bintis Morris Mugisha’s Tembele won three awards, including Best Feature Film. Eric Emokor’s Nalwawo bagged Best Actress Feature Film and Best Local Indigenous Film. Read: Blessing in disguise for Uganda film festival Foot Wine revolves around the story of Christine, who is an alcoholic, a proud bartender and full-time brewer of African traditional alcohol in her bar located in the slum where she lives. The bar is her life, hobby, and office. It’s the street on which she toils and hustles. Foot Wine depicts the good and bad sides of Uganda’s traditional banana beer commonly known as tonto, made from fermented mashed sour bananas mixed with sorghum. “I was born and raised in the bar. And alcohol was the family’s source of livelihood,” Christine says in the one-hour-47-minute-long film which was released this year. Christine (played by Sharon Atuhairwe), has to deal with police investigations and consequences in her community following the death of a man in her bar. The annual festival is organised by the Uganda Communications Commission, and this year it received 282 submissions. The jury comprised Njoki Muhoho as the chief jurist (Kenya), Ana Belen Asfura Fuentes (Canada), Oluwagbemiga Ben-Daniel (US), Dorothy Atuhura (Uganda), Cindy Magara (Uganda), Matthew Bishanga (Uganda), Philip Luswata (Uganda), and James Okoit Owaraga (Uganda). Best East African Film: Best International Film: Best Short Film: Best Student Film: Best Animation: Best Documentary: Best Actor in TV Drama Series: Best Actress in TV Drama Series: Best TV Drama: Best Costume Design: Best Production Design: Best Sound Design: Best Post Production/Editing: Best Cinematography: Best Script (Screenplay): Best Supporting Actor Feature Film: Best Supporting Actress Feature Film: Best Actor Feature Film: Best Actress Feature Film: Best Local Indigenous Film: Viewers’ Choice Film: Lifetime Achievement Award: Best Feature Film: Best Director (Film of the Year): 