Booster shots of the Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna vaccines lose substantial effectiveness after about four months, but still provide significant protection against hospitalisation, a new study has shown. In the first study on the effectiveness of third dose of mRNA vaccines, results show that immunity against severe Covid-19 disease begins to wane after four months. “The mRNA vaccines, including the booster shot, are very effective, but effectiveness declines over time. Our findings suggest that additional doses may be necessary to maintain protection against Covid-19, especially for high-risk populations,” said study co-author Brian Dixon. Waning immunity was observed during both the Delta and Omicron variant waves in similar fashion to how mRNA vaccine effectiveness wanes after a second dose. Although protection decreased with time, a booster shot was still highly effective at preventing moderate and severe illness as well as hospitalisation. According to a nationwide study from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the vaccine was 91 per cent effective in preventing a vaccinated person from being hospitalised during the two months after a booster shot, the study found. But after four months, protection fell to 78 per cent. Protection also faded from 87 to 66 per cent in preventing trips to the hospital after four months. After more than five months, vaccine effectiveness fell to roughly 31 per cent, but researchers noted that estimate was “imprecise because few data were available” for that group of people. Although waning of vaccine protection after two doses of mRNA vaccine has been observed during the period of the Delta variant wave, little is known about durability of protection after three doses during periods of Delta or Omicron variant wave. Last month, the World Health Organization (WHO) recommended the wider administration of a third shot of the Pfizer-BioNTech mRNA vaccine – as well as jabs for children age five and older. In its statement, the global health body said it was recommending boosters for most adults because in the short-term, “a third dose (booster dose) may fully or partially restore vaccine effectiveness”.